---
title: "The Rich and the Simple: On the Implicit Bias of Adam and SGD"
collection: publications
category: preprint
#permalink: 
excerpt: ''
date: 2025-03-01
venue: 'Submitted'
#slidesurl: ''
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.24022'
authors: 'Bhavya Vasudeva, Jung Whan Lee, Vatsal Sharan, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi'
#citation: 'Bhavya Vasudeva, Jung Whan Lee, Vatsal Sharan, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi. &quot;The Rich and the Simple: On the Implicit Bias of Adam and SGD.&quot; <i> Under Review</i>.'
---

Adam is the de facto optimization algorithm for several deep learning applications, but an understanding of its implicit bias and how it differs from other algorithms, particularly standard first-order methods such as (stochastic) gradient descent (GD), remains limited. In practice, neural networks trained with SGD are known to exhibit simplicity bias -- a tendency to find simple solutions. In contrast, we show that Adam is more resistant to such simplicity bias. To demystify this phenomenon, in this paper, we investigate the differences in the implicit biases of Adam and GD when training two-layer ReLU neural networks on a binary classification task involving synthetic data with Gaussian clusters. We find that GD exhibits a simplicity bias, resulting in a linear decision boundary with a suboptimal margin, whereas Adam leads to much richer and more diverse features, producing a nonlinear boundary that is closer to the Bayes' optimal predictor. This richer decision boundary also allows Adam to achieve higher test accuracy both in-distribution and under certain distribution shifts. We theoretically prove these results by analyzing the population gradients. To corroborate our theoretical findings, we present empirical results showing that this property of Adam leads to superior generalization across datasets with spurious correlations where neural networks trained with SGD are known to show simplicity bias and don't generalize well under certain distributional shifts.